# **Intro:**

Did you know that over 3.3 Million Australians currently live in poverty including 700,000 children. According to studies conducted by the Australian government, it has been identified that over 40% of Australians who rent will most likely not be able to pay rent for the next 3 months. Good morning to all those present here today at the Parliament House in Canberra, I would like to thank you for putting some time out to hear what I have to say as a citizen of Australia. My name is Joe, working as a parking enforcement officer in Port Phillip, Victoria. My job earns me an average salary which barely allows me to put food on the table which is what I would like to address to you all today, the cost of living crisis.

# **Body 1**
Many people have the dream of getting out of their rental property and own their own, as it gives them the freedom they and the experience. However, with the current crisis, 3/4 of first-home buyers do not even have 20% deposit for a home loan which has been requiring them to either pay for Lenders Mortgage Insurance also known as LMI or sourcing funds from their family members such as their parents. According to the Helia Insurance Study interviewing over 1000s first-home buyers that took place in July 2024 found that nearly 90% of them agreed stating that it was near to impossible for them to purchase a first-home. Over 55% of the interviewed buyers currently take up LMI, which is an increase from the 2023 study that took place which found only 36% of them use LMI as they cannot afford the 20% deposit requirement. 48% of the buyers found that government assistant schemes that have been put in place have allowed them to get their first home. However, 84% of the research study participants stated that their first home is not their ‘dream’ or ‘ideal’ property. Therefore, even though there are government assistant schemes available for first-home buyers, many still do not get their dream first home as they are spending greater than 50% of their take-home income on paying off their mortgage.

# **Body 2**
Since the pandemic has existed, food has been a problem for many who are involved in the cost-of-living crisis. According to an article published in The Conversation, around 3.7 Million Australians had experienced food insecurity in 2023 which has been a 10% rise from 2022. In 2022, food prices have costed 9.2% more compared to 2021 and still remain higher than ever since the COVID Pandemic hit. Though most food categories have been affected by this price hike, the healthy food category has been the affected the most - doubling compared to discretionary foods. Many supermarkets are choosing their own prices using ‘Inflation’ as the excuse for the price hike and then generating record-breaking net-profits such as Woolworths making $1.62 Billion and Coles making $1.10 Billion in the 2022-2023 year. According to the Foodbank Hunger Report 2023, 23% of Queensland households are actively hungry which is 1 in 5 households and more than 1 in 3 households require assistance but are too afraid to ask for it due to embarrassment. Some are even paying with cash due to surcharges and fees associated with their debit/credit cards. According to an article by the ABC News, one shopper purchases products at Coles a day before they are best before as that’s when the supermarket giant puts products on sale due to the register system which does not allow products to be sold after they have been expired. These products then are frozen which allows the food to last longer. Though this isn’t an ideal solution, many do not have any other choice to be able to feed their families and put food on the table.

# **Body 3**
Over the past year, the fuel price has been increasing drastically. Large cities in Australia such as Sydney, Melbourne, Adelaide and Brisbane have peaked prices up to $2.25 per litre in April this year. Youth such as teens and students are struggling to pay for these outrageous fuel prices. According to a ABC News article, an apprentice who is on apprentice wages can only afford to fill up $10 - $15 most of the times due to this issue. Certain areas in New South Wales regional city has prices that can vary up to 40 cents a litre. According to the ACCC Petrol Monitoring Report issued in March 2024 if the price of Petrol was 194.9 cents per litre, 48% of the fuel price is the international cost of the refined petrol which is equivalent to 93.1 cents, 34% is excise goods and service tax which is 66.5 cents and the remaining 18% is other costs and margins equivalent to 35.3 cents. Though the Australian Government does not have control over the international petrol price, it does have control over how much it taxes on fuel. An analysis conducted by NRMA, a monitoring group, it’s been identified that the average Australian family spends more than $100 on fuel a week which equates to about $5,500 annually. Many Australians are cutting back on other essentials such as food to ensure they have enough money left from their salary or wage so that they can just pay for fuel as their car gets them around to work. The coalition government ensured that fuel excise would be halved for 6 months in 2022 due to the cost of living crisis however, once the Labor government came into office, this ‘scheme’ you may call was not renewed.
